[WHOOSH]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> As a filmmaker, I try to
remain a neutral observer,
but what caused me to tell Stan
Grof's story and what I learned
in the process made
that impossible.
My name is Susan.
And for most of my life,
I felt like I really
didn't belong here, like I
was born on the wrong planet.
All I could think of
was how to go back.
[BABY CRYING]
The magic that filled
my dreams would
evaporate with the daylight.
For a while, ballet seemed like
the place where I belonged,
but even that
eventually changed.
Then in my early
20s, I tried LSD.
[CHEERING]
For the first time,
I felt lovable.
Finally, I believed in myself,
and everything changed.
But without a
structure to ground me,
I made bad choices that
harmed my body and others that
took years to undo.
And then I discovered shamanism
and learned how to journey.
Up I went, past the clouds,
beyond the Earth's atmosphere
until I was surrounded
by darkness.
I met my teachers and felt
that I had known them forever.
They healed me, helped me
make sense of the world,
and could explain anything.
Once I even asked for a
story, and they showed me one.
I started to make changes
that were difficult.
I traveled to France
and fell in love.
But then we couldn't
get pregnant,
and I learned that
if I wanted a baby,
I'd have to tune
back into Earth.
>> We got a lot of candy.
When I thought my kids were old
enough, I tried to reconnect.
There were insights,
but no upward journey
to meet my teachers.
In the search for another
way to reconnect with them,
I learned about Stan Grof.
>> Consciousness is not
something that emerges
as an accident after billions
of years of evolution,
something that requires
a central nervous system.
And I had an experience that
just literally changed my life,
both professionally
and personally.
People get tranquilizers
and get hospitalized
for experiences that
in other cultures
would be considered
extremely valuable.
>> Stan Grof is known as
a pioneer of psychedelic
psychotherapy, drawing from
his own experiences and from
thousands of high-dose LSD
sessions with his patients.
The insights he
gained personally
combined with the
experiences of his patients
expanded his understanding
of the human psyche.
It stretched beyond the
biographical information
that begins after we are
born to memories surrounding
our time in the womb and
during the birth process.
His expanded map even
included the spiritual nature
of humanity, recognizing
past life experiences
and dimensions of consciousness
we share with all of creation.
Stan used these insights
to co-found transpersonal
psychology with Abraham Maslow,
and working with his wife
Christina, organized
international transpersonal
conferences around the world.
During much of this
period, Stan was also
the scholar in residence at the
Esalen Institute in Big Sur.
Spiritual masters and
groundbreaking pioneers
representing a broad
spectrum of disciplines
were frequent guests
at the workshops
and month-long retreats he
offered during his 14 years
there.
It was there that Stan
and Christina developed
holotropic breathwork, a
breathing technique that
could induce powerful
non-ordinary states
of consciousness, similar
to an LSD session.
I had to meet Stan.
On some deep level, I knew he
could help me find my way back
in.
When I learned he would
be teaching a course,
I signed up immediately.
>> We're so far talking
about non-ordinary states
of consciousness, but I have
been all these 60 years now
interested in a
very significant,
large subgroup of these
non-ordinary experiences
for which current psychiatry and
psychology has no special name.
They are all put in the
category of altered states
of consciousness.
What it suggests
somehow is that there's
a correct way of experiencing
ourselves and the world,
and that in these
states, it's distorted.
We have to use
this new psychology
if we want to use effectively
holotropic states,
if you want to run
psychedelic sessions
or do holotropic
breathwork or if we
want to work with people who
are in spiritual emergency.
>> I had read about Stan's
theories on how our experiences
in the womb affected
our unconscious,
but to hear him explain it gave
me a whole new understanding.
>> The experiences-- if
you regress to birth,
the experiences come
in four patterns.
I call them perinatal matrices,
basic perinatal matrices.
The first perinatal
matrix relates
to the situation
of the fetus still
in the womb before the
onset of the delivery.
This could be pregnancy which
is the result of planning,
of the parents'
loving expectation.
The mother is
physically healthy, is
in emotionally good condition.
A reliving of that
kind of state would
be a very ecstatic experience.
Now, this doesn't
necessarily happen.
There are pregnancies
which are a result of rape,
of a one-night stand when
both parents were drunk,
where the marriage
was broken, the mother
is abused, physically and
emotionally unhealthy.
The pregnancy could
be so unwelcome
that there are
attempts at abortion.
Another possibility, the
mother is Rh negative,
the father is Rh positive
so that from the beginning,
the fetus is being attacked,
immunologically treated
as an invader.
Come nine months
plus minus, this
is the onset of the delivery.
First, hormonal
changes, which are then
translated into mechanical
contractions of the uterus.
Each contraction compresses
the arteries and interrupts
placentary circulation between
the mother and the child,
which means no supply of oxygen,
no nourishment coming in,
and there's no removal
of metabolic product.
There's no resolution for it
because the cervix is not open.
Just contractions of the
uterus in a closed system.
Now with each
contraction, the cervix
is being pulled over the head.
It's dilating.
When it reaches
the necessary size,
then it's the transition
to the third matrix.
The contractions continue
with all the consequences,
but the cervix is
now open, so there
is these laborious propulsions
through the birth canal.
Now there are tremendous
pressures here.
Suffocation and the pain
generate powerful energy,
which has all the
qualities of sexual energy.
Our first encounter
with sexual energy,
we were inflicting pain
on another organism.
Another organism was
inflicting pain on us.
We couldn't breathe.
There were a lot of
pressures and fear.
This kind of experience
then can become the basis
of the development of
various sexual dysfunctions,
deviations, aberrations,
perversions.
Then we have the completion
of the delivery, head first
or feet first.
And then the
umbilical cord is cut.
From then on, the child exists
as an anatomically independent
individual, still biologically,
emotionally dependent,
of course.
>> The matrices
begin with unity,
transition to hell
with no escape,
then to purgatory with the
end in sight where you are
the victim and the
perpetrator and the observer,
and finally culminate in
freedom and a newfound sense
of connection.
As Stan finished, I remembered
the rebirthing workshop
I'd taken at Rajneeshpuram
back in the '80s.
I felt like I was dropping
into a deep pit that grew
more painful as I descended.
Just when I thought
I was going to die,
I burst through into an
ocean of love and light.
Joseph Campbell is
best known for his work
in comparing mythologies
and religions
from cultures around the world.
He met Stan in the late '60s at
a conference in New York City.
When Campbell
heard Stan's theory
on the four perinatal
matrices, he instantly
solved a mystery that had
intrigued him for years.
He couldn't understand
how cultures
from diverse
geographical locations
could share the same
death rebirth themes.
He called it a monomyth.
But when he saw
Stan's presentation,
he understood that
these cultures
were reliving the experience
of their own birth.
The perinatal matrices,
especially the third
moving into the fourth,
served as the threshold
for the hero's journey.
The rites of passage that
these cultures developed
allowed their initiates to
access unconscious birth
memories, face
their fear of death,
and finally free themselves
from a deep maternal dependency.
>> Birth itself is not
only a rite of passage,
but is perhaps the universal
rite of passage that we all go
through.
Perhaps it's through
that experience
that we come into the
world, knowing deeply
that if we are to succeed
in the ongoing actualization
of our potentials,
whatever they are
as individuals,
throughout the life cycle,
for however long we live, we
will need to undergo repeatedly
similar rites of passage.
>> Holotropic breathwork
is an experiential approach
to self-exploration, to
therapy which uses very,
very simple means.
It uses faster breathing.
It uses powerful, evocative
music, and also a certain kind
of bodywork when it's indicated.
>> So each individual
will choose a partner.
One of those people does the
breathing and the other person
sits with him or her, and
then they switch roles
so that everybody gets
a chance to participate
both as a breather and
as what we call a sitter.
>> And we also combine it with
what we call mandala drawings.
And after the session,
they try to communicate
what happened to them in
a kind of graphic way.
>> The second day of the
conference was the breathwork.
I couldn't believe
how anxious I felt.
Towards the end of
the three hours,
I sat up, thinking
that it was over.
It had been a
pleasant experience,
and I tried to tell
the facilitator
that I was fine, that she could
take care of the next person.
But she wouldn't leave.
The minutes stretched on when
suddenly a wave of sadness
rolled up from my
belly, and that's
when I understood the
meaning of Stan's phrase.
As long as it takes,
everyone deserves
the time for the
process to fully unfold.
Later during the
course, Stan showed
slides from his
Tantra presentation.
It was the same theme
that my teachers showed me
some 20 years earlier.
Suddenly, I realized that on
some deep level I wasn't alone.
There was something universal
about what I'd experienced,
and Stan held the wisdom
I needed to make sense
of how it all fit together.
About nine months
later, I learned
that Christina had
died, and worried
that Stan might follow her
if there wasn't something
to keep him engaged.
When I learned about the
conference honoring him,
I knew I had to go.
>> Welcome to the Bay Area.
And as Rick Tarnas
has been heard to say,
where new ideas meet
the least resistance.
[LAUGHTER]
>> For over a half century, Stan
Grof has fully engaged and then
participated in the great
transformation of worldview
that is taking place in our era.
>> He was my mentor, fellow
explorer of new visions,
co-presenter at many seminars,
and guide in experiential
therapies.
>> At 75 years ago, Stan and
I were kind of conspiring
to attack the non-ordinary
state of consciousness.
>> When I finally overcame my
qualms and moved from semi-hard
drugs to psychedelics and
started having LSD experiences,
which were the most amazing
things I'd ever had.
>> It was a very different--
>> Here were all these
accomplished people,
and the one thing they had
in common was an experience
of non-ordinary states
of consciousness.
I'd always imagined that
people who did psychedelics
remained hippies for life.
And what about the
mainstream news
warnings of irreparable
damage from using LSD?
But the presenters
were some of the most
accomplished and insightful
people I'd ever heard.
Stan offered them a
context that they in turn
expanded and shared.
>> Stan developed
these descriptions,
described exactly--
I mean, in detail some of
the most gruesome experiences
that I'd had that where I was
in a medieval torture chamber
being beaten to death by guys
with their enormous clubs
to a bloody pulp.
And I thought,
well, how does this
relate to my Oedipus complex or
anything else for that matter?
[LAUGHTER]
>> For me personally and many
who spoke and many who are
in this room, just going
near Stan changes your life.
>> During the event,
Christina was honored for her
contributions as well.
She introduced Stan to
muktananda, contributed
to the development of
holotropic breathwork,
and together they created an
approach to spiritual emergence
when suppressed memories
and emotions spontaneously
rise to the surface.
Their technique helped
people avoid hospitalization
and misdiagnosis.
Christina also
shared her struggle
with Kundalini awakening
and alcoholism,
which helped others
find resolution
with their challenges.
And I could more than relate
to her feelings of insecurity
around so many accomplished
academics and professionals.
The next day was the
workshop designed
to support the Grof foundation.
I'll never forget how
frightened I felt. Here
I was, an outsider
among people who
knew Stan and had been studying
or working with him for years.
But I found my
courage and suggested
that the best way to
share Stan's research
about the healing power
of non-ordinary states
of consciousness was to
make a movie about him.
>> This is my favorite
sculpture here.
Did you see that?
So have you seen
like the helicopter?
You have a flight, and then
you have a ship, and then
wheels at the bottom.
So it's protection against
any kind of transportation
that can be involved.
>> As I set up my equipment
for the first interview,
I couldn't help thinking,
who was I to interview Stan?
And yet, I felt so open and
clear-headed in his presence,
as though I had access to
information that wasn't
available to me on my own.
What took me by surprise was
Stan's incredible kindness
and generosity.
Almost immediately,
we dove into his past.
Stan grew up in
Czechoslovakia, just
before the outbreak
of World War II.
His early childhood was
relatively peaceful,
but the threat of
a Nazi occupation
became a reality when the
German army invaded in 1939.
Stan was eight years
old when Nazi soldiers
invaded Prague and forced
Czech citizens to surrender.
For six years, Stan was exposed
to their sadistic cruelty,
including the brutal retaliation
after the assassination
of SS officer Reinhard Heydrich,
Hitler's third in command.
Known as the architect
of the Holocaust,
Heydrich had been sent
to Prague to wipe out
defiance of German rule.
On May 27, 1942, Heydrich was
attacked by Czech resistance
fighters and died from his
injuries a few days later.
The Nazi retaliation lasted
more than three months.
The neighboring villages
of Lidice and Lezáky were
destroyed.
Most of the adult population
was murdered, while all but
a few children disappeared.
Stan was 12 years
old at the time
and remembers the continuous
executions leading up
to the death of the resistance
fighters who'd killed Heydrich.
It was a terrifying period
for the entire country.
Thankfully, when the
war ended in 1945,
Czechoslovakia was restored
to its pre-war boundaries
and enjoyed a
peaceful existence.
But just three years
later, with the support
of the Soviet Union, the
communists took over.
Two Czech national heroes died
under suspicious circumstances,
and once again a shadow
spread over Czechoslovakia.
Stan was 17 when he was
accused of possessing
a leaflet encouraging people to
challenge the Communist Party.
>> After school it was 1
o'clock, and the bell was
ringing.
And I opened the door, and there
were two men in leather coats
and just broke in.
And they just completely
ransacked the apartment.
>> Stan was arrested and held
in prison for four months.
In fact, his first experiences
with non-ordinary states
of consciousness happened
during a two-week period
of disrupted sleep
and interrogations.
>> And basically, we had to
go through our biography,
the whole life from childhood.
And then we were sent
back to the cell.
And we didn't know if they would
come back in another 20 minutes
or if we'll be able to
sleep the rest of the night.
As I was talking
about the childhood,
I started actually seeing
scenes from my childhood.
What was really interesting
was in spite of the very, very
difficult situation,
I started realizing
that there was something
about it that I enjoyed.
>> It's something of a
miracle that he ever made it
into medical school after
that, but a two-month stint
on a student brigade was the
first in a series of events
that turned it around.
>> Basically, our task was to
remove the rock from one side
to another so that there
was a space for a highway.
And they really didn't
have any other way
of finding out how we
were and by giving them
the count of the wheelbarrows
that we sort of transferred.
So there was a
possibility of cheating.
>> Fellow classmates who had
joined the Communist Party,
despite their lack of
commitment to party beliefs,
tried to protect Stan by
giving him an award for his
outstanding work and exceptional
relationship with the working
class.
Stan was later
assigned to a school
filled with students from
labor and farmworker families.
As the school's director was
recovering from a heart attack
when Stan was admitted, he
failed to read Stan's file
and recommended him for
a presidential gold medal
for his exceptional studies.
So when the medical
school's admission staff
read Stan's file,
they saw that he'd
been acquitted for
lack of evidence,
but that he'd also been honored
as an outstanding laborer
and awarded a gold medal
by President Gottwald.
And so Stan was admitted
to medical school.
>> Well, when I was a student
working in psychiatry that was
in the psychiatric
clinic in Prague,
there was a lot of very drastic
therapeutic methods that were
being used.
And when I graduated,
I was working
in a psychiatric hospital.
And as a newcomer, as a sort
of freshly baked psychiatrist,
I had to get up early and
give the electroshocks
and the insulin comas, up to
25 electroshocks and 15 insulin
comas.
>> From the late
1920s to the 1950s,
insulin comas were used
to treat schizophrenia.
After an insulin
injection, patients
might perspire heavily.
Many salivated profusely.
And eventually, they
would contort in spasms.
Once a profound state of
unconsciousness was reached,
a nasogastric tube was inserted.
Bile was drawn to verify the
correct placement of the tube,
and then a glucose
solution was administered.
Archival films depict
patients waking
to feel energetic and hungry.
The procedure had a
mortality rate of one in 100.
Stan induced 15
insulin comas a day.
Electroshock therapy began in
the late 1930s from the belief
that artificially
induced convulsions
could cure mental illness.
Electrodes were placed
on a patient's temples
while an electric current
passed through them.
The resulting convulsions
were strong enough
to cause broken bones if the
patients weren't restrained.
Curare derived from
South American plants
was later used to
paralyze motor nerves
and lessen the convulsions.
Stan administered 25
electroshock convulsions daily.
Even psychoanalysis proved
disappointing for Stan.
>> I mean, I was in
psychoanalysis for seven years.
And when in the fourth year I
started bringing in my dreams
images that were related
to the [INAUDIBLE],,
this was considered to
be relatively successful
psychoanalysis.
>> Fortunately for Stan,
Sandoz Laboratories needed help
exploring applications for a
new drug synthesized by Albert
Hoffman, Lysergic Acid
Diethylamide, or LSD.
The Swiss scientist was
revisiting his synthesis
of the ergot fungus
when he accidentally
intoxicated himself.
A drop of the clear
solution touched his finger
and was absorbed into his
system when he wiped his eye.
Intrigued by the
unusual sensations,
Hoffman decided to
try a tiny dose.
A few days later, what followed
was an endless bike ride
home and a call for
a doctor when Hoffman
thought he might be dying.
Once the crisis passed,
Hoffman realized
that his discovery was
an incredibly powerful
psychotropic substance.
>> In 1954, we got a
sample of ampules of LSD.
They got an idea
that it might be
something interesting for
psychiatrists, psychologists.
And would we want
to work with it?
So my preceptor did
not have the time
to spend six to eight
hours with people on LSD.
And so he used several
of us as gophers.
We were sitting
there and taking care
of the experimental subjects
and keeping records.
But in that early stage,
students were excluded.
So I had two years
when I was listening
to these incredible
stories and not being
able to have the experience.
So just about the
first thing I did
when I graduated was to
have this experience myself.
My teacher was specifically
interested in training
the brainwaves, which
means exposing people
to powerful stroboscopic
light of various frequencies
and finding out if you can
influence the brainwaves
in the suboccipital area.
So those of us who
wanted to have a session,
we had to agree that
we also would be
going through this experiment.
When my own experience
was culminating,
a research assistant took
me to a very little room,
and then she brought
this gigantic strobe.
And in the next
moment, there was light
like I had never
seen in my life.
My consciousness was
catapulted out of my body.
I lost the research assistant.
I lost the clinic.
I lost Prague.
I lost the planet.
Then I had the feeling that I
was completely extinguished.
I ceased to exist in the
form in which I knew myself.
And instead, I had the
feeling that I somehow
became all of existence.
I became nothing, but
if I became nothing,
I became everything.
I was in the
astronomical universe,
or I was the universe.
And there are things happening
for which at the time
I didn't even have a name.
But later, I read
about the Big Bang
and the black holes and the
white holes and wormholes.
It was just an amazing
cosmic spectacle.
And then she turned it off.
My consciousness
started shrinking again.
I became myself.
But there was a problem, because
I ended up finding the planet,
finding the clinic,
finding my body.
But my consciousness was kind
of floating around the body,
and I couldn't find ways
of aligning those two.
At that point, it was
absolutely clear to me
that what they taught
me at the university,
that consciousness
is somehow created
by the activity of the
neurons in the brain, suddenly
it's totally absurd.
It was clear to me
that consciousness
was a cosmic phenomenon.
Could matter bouncing off
atoms or subatomic particles
create all that we see,
including the beauty of nature,
the beauty of the universe,
the intelligence that you
see in animals, that
you see in people?
Is it really something that can
create science and philosophy?
When you see it, it's absurd.
There is a beauty and there is
an intelligence which cannot
come out of matter.
Then I came down
from this session.
But if I'm now stuck
with psychiatry,
this is by far the
most interesting thing
I could do, studying
these non-ordinary states.
>> At a complex of research
institutes near Prague,
Stan was involved in laboratory
testing of LSD and other
substances such as
psilocybin and mescaline.
40 test subjects, a mix
of healthy individuals
and psychiatric patients, would
undergo hourly blood draws,
urine samples, and psychological
and neurological testing
during their sessions,
all in the hope
of identifying the chemical
source of mental illness.
>> Well, the initial excitement
was that LSD can produce what
we called experimental
psychosis.
We can give it to quote,
unquote, "normal people."
We can do all kinds of tests
before, during, and after.
And we get an idea of what's
happening biochemically
when the cycle is so
profoundly influenced.
And this was fascinating,
because we are talking
about microscopic amounts.
Hundred millions of
a gram can change
profoundly human consciousness
for six to eight hours.
If this is the case,
mental diseases,
it would be aberrations
of chemistry.
Now if we could identify
this chemical culprit,
we could also find some
kind of neutralizing agent.
And this would have been my test
tube solution of schizophrenia
and other psychosis.
This would be like the
Holy Grail of psychiatry.
>> But during the testing,
it became clear that it was
impossible to predict the kind
of experience subjects would
have, regardless of what
psychedelic they took.
In fact, the same subject could
have dramatically different
experiences while taking
the same substance
on different occasions.
>> So this is not the
way pharmacology works.
You have a pretty good
idea what response
you would get with antibiotics
or whatever substance
we are talking about.
We are dealing with a catalyst,
and that the content is
not produced by the
substances, but that it's
released from the deep
unconscious realms
that current psychiatry and
psychology does not know about.
Because when it comes, they
think it's pathological.
They don't see it
as something that's
germane to the human psyche.
And then I started seeing it
as a telescope or a microscope.
With a telescope, we can
see galaxies that we cannot
normally study.
With a microscope, you
discover an enormous microworld
that is here, but we
are not aware of it
unless we have the proper tool.
So then I took it from the
laboratory to clinical practice
and started seeing
it as something
that's going to deepen and
intensify psychotherapy.
>> During this period, Stan won
a competition with a paper he
wrote about his realizations.
The prize earned
him the directorship
of the psychedelic program at
a newly built research center.
Just as in the
laboratory testing,
subjects in the clinical
tests had a broad range
of experiences, including
blissful and ecstatic ones.
And even emotionally
challenging experiences
were soothed as the session
ended and memories that
had surfaced were resolved.
Stan even noted that
the clinical sessions
seemed very similar to
classic psychotherapy.
But over time, patterns emerged.
>> The contents of the
unconscious were not stored
in the form of kind of
disconnected mosaic,
but they were forming certain
dynamic constellations.
Certain issues were
appearing on different levels
at different times
of their biography,
and they were creating
these dynamic packets that
were connected with the
same type of emotions
or physical feeling.
Let's say they would have
a choking constellation.
They would be near drowning
when they were seven
and being choked by an older
brother repeatedly when they
were four, then whooping cough.
But then the deeper level
was the choking at birth.
So I started talking about these
constellations, COEX systems.
>> In addition to the
understanding of COEX systems,
Stan observed how the
experiences of his clients
evolved dramatically during
a series of sessions.
>> Only the early sessions
seemed to have the nature
of the experiences that I
knew from psychoanalysis.
But then sooner or
later, even if we
are using sort of
just medium dosages,
people started talking about
being in a place where they
felt their life was threatened,
that they're going crazy,
they will never get
out of that state.
They started having experiences
of choking or nausea.
And then one after
another told me
that they believed that
what they are experiencing
must be a reliving of birth.
At a certain point, I
decided to test this.
And I took 300 micrograms
on my own at home.
Within an hour, I was in a
very, very difficult place.
On the wall, I had a painting,
some type of painting.
And there was one which was like
a stylized dog with a soldier.
They started
fighting, and then I
had the feeling that everything
was kind of closing in.
And very quickly,
I was in something
that I now call the
second perinatal matrix.
It was like a space where it
seemed absolutely hopeless.
Very, very uncomfortable
emotionally.
And then I started feeling
a pressure on my head.
I realized that I was somehow
stuck in the birth canal,
and all my life appeared to
be absolutely meaningless.
I started seeing the deep truth
in existential philosophy.
You know, life is absurd.
We go from nowhere to nowhere.
We start life as
infants in pain,
and this is how we
are going to end.
But even if I knew that
this was birth, then
somehow the thought came
that this state would not end
unless I find meaning in life.
And then I said,
well, it's knowledge.
And I saw myself
going to libraries,
devouring one book
after another.
And then it took me
to the end of my life
where I couldn't remember
what I had for dinner,
let alone what I read
in all those books.
And then I said,
well, having children
gives meaning to your life.
And then it was like, well, you
don't give meaning to your life
by creating creatures whose
life is as meaningless as yours.
And then after
some time, it just
sort of very rapidly
opened up, and suddenly I
was in a very ecstatic state.
And I realized, you cannot
find meaning in life using
your reason.
This was a very important
first experience.
It suddenly showed me whole
new potentials of psychedelics.
>> Through his own experiences
and those of his patients,
Stan learned that lower
doses brought up biographical
information while higher ones
brought patients much farther.
He also noted that something
fascinating was happening.
>> When I was hitting
some difficult places,
I had a parade of my patients,
and I suddenly understood where
they were including the
meaninglessness and even
suicidal impulses.
Equipped with current
psychiatry, I just had no clue.
The only way was
experiential learning.
You cannot learn from books
what these patients are going
through.
>> Without the distraction
of constant testing and with
higher doses of LSD, Stan's
clients were encouraged to go
inward.
To Stan's surprise, they
kept journeying back
to the perinatal realm.
>> It's not easy to really
question some of the really
fundamental assumptions.
And I had a very
personal experience
that made it even worse.
I went as a second year student
to a lecture of Professor Vilém
Laufberger.
And I asked, how far
back does our memory go?
Can we, for example,
relive our birth?
And he looked at me like
I was a total asshole,
and said, of course not.
I mean, the cortex
is not myelinized.
And then everybody was laughing,
so I was pretty shamed.
So I had that kind
of additional memory,
like this was really
stupid to think
that you could
relive your birth,
even if it seems
very convincing.
But then of course, if
I saw it again and again
and had a few more
experiences myself,
I realized that this
edifice of psychiatry
that looks so respectable is
like a Colossus on clay feet.
>> As Stan described
the scientific
establishment's reluctance
to accept perinatal memories,
I remembered my 30 hours
of labor giving birth
to my daughter, Charlotte.
I eventually needed
help pushing her out.
Maybe that's why she wouldn't
go through those tunnels
at the playgroup.
I was so concerned that I
took her to see an osteopath.
The doctor swore that she
wasn't applying any pressure
to Charlotte's head.
[BABY CRYING]
Afterwards, Charlotte
had no problem
going through the tunnels.
When Charlotte
was 20 months old,
we were attacked by two gunmen.
We were living in the
suburbs outside of Paris,
and I was four months
pregnant with my son, Oscar.
The first shot missed my
head by about 12 inches,
and the remaining three
shattered our bedroom windows.
We escaped unharmed,
but for a month or so,
I'd wake up at night
reliving the experience
and imagining
where I would hide.
Later, when Oscar was old
enough to play hide and seek,
no one could find him.
Oscar?
Oh.
It was clear to me now
that my children's behavior
had been influenced
either by what
had happened while
they were in the womb
or during their actual birth.
>> Mama, I'm going to hide.
Come inside and hide.
I'm going to hide.
>> How could scientists so
easily dismiss the reality
of perinatal memories?
>> Come inside and hide.
>> The usual view about the
mind is that the mind's confined
to the head.
It's nothing but the
activity of the brain.
For the materialists who
represent the majority position
within academic
life and in science,
minds are what brains do, and
memories are stored materially
inside the brain.
It's all inside the brain.
I think that's an incredibly
truncated and narrow view.
First of all, I think
we access our memories
by morphic resonance.
They're not inside the brain.
And secondly, I think that
our consciousness, our minds
are not confined to the
inside of our heads,
but stretch out beyond
and through fields.
We're all used to the
idea of magnetic fields
being inside magnets
and stretching
beyond them or the
gravitational field of the Earth
being inside the Earth
and stretching out
into space invisibly, or
the fields of cell phones
being inside the cell phone and
stretching invisibly around it,
which is why they work.
And all matter now has
fields associated with it.
And of course, the brain does.
It has electromagnetic
fields you can measure
with an electroencephalograph.
But I think that the
fields of the mind
are much more extensive,
and these extended fields
of the mind are a
kind of morphic field.
So it's really a field
theory of the mind.
>> Now that I realized that
we could hold memories from
our time in the womb, I
couldn't stop thinking about
the influence these
unconscious memories might have
on our lives.
One of Stan's clients
showed just how powerful
these memories are.
>> You know, the patient whom
I called Peter came with kind
of a combination of obsession
and masochistic impulses
and tremendous need and wish
to be locked in a cellar and be
exposed to some emotional
and physical pain, torturous.
>> Peter would search for these
men in parks, train stations,
and other public places.
And on one occasion, he was
struck on the head and robbed.
The last episode occurred
when Peter was on a train
with a man who claimed to
have the perfect cellar
to satisfy his obsession.
When the man got up
to use the toilet,
Peter gave in to his gnawing
doubt and opened the man's bag.
Horrified by what
he found, Peter
jumped from the moving train
and ended up in the hospital.
When psychiatric treatment
failed to help him,
he was sent to Stan where
he underwent a series
of high-dose LSD sessions.
>> A very, very interesting
COEX system emerged in a series
of sessions.
The most superficial layers were
actually the traumas that he
himself created.
Then as we continued, another
layer of the COEX system
emerged, which was from
the Second World War
when he was taken
to Nazi Germany.
And he was in a
situation where there was
a great danger of bombardment.
Two of the SS officers
were using him
for their homosexual practices,
initially under gunpoint.
And then it went
to his childhood
when his father, who
was an alcoholic,
was very, very brutal
and used to beat him
with a leather strap.
And his mother, who
actually always wore black,
punished him repeatedly by
locking him in a dark cellar
and leaving him without food.
So on that level,
it seemed like it
was a combined punishment
from the two parents
that he was seeking.
Finally, it ended up
in a situation where
he was stuck in the
birth canal and realized
that was the template
of the situation
that he was searching for.
But when he actually
experienced that,
he got more than
he bargained for.
>> Because Stan had previously
experienced the kind of death
rebirth process Peter
underwent, he was not fearful
for Peter's safety, and
could allow the full process
to unfold.
After that session, Peter
was finally liberated
from his
self-destructive impulses
and able to live
a productive life.
Around the time Stan
was working with Peter,
he traveled to Amsterdam
for a conference on LSD
psychotherapy.
Pauline McCririck
and Joyce Martin
were two psychoanalysts
who were actually
using LSD and doing what
they called fusion therapy.
Clients who were deprived in
their childhood of being held
would lie with
full-body contact.
And they had amazing
results with this.
We were both in
Amsterdam, and so we
decided to have a session.
As part of my last
perinatal session,
I got into this atmosphere
of bloody revolutions.
And in the middle of it, I
really identified with Lenin.
I shared his passion
against oppression.
And I realized that
part of it was a czar,
but a good part of it was the
compression of the birth canal.
So this kind of atmosphere
of revolutions and struggling
for birth somehow
completely fused.
And I realized that
there's a relationship
between historical events
like wars and revolutions
and what we carry at the
perinatal level, possibly even
something that is a source
of that kind of violence.
But then the
session ended, and I
went through the whole
range of relationships
with women, the destructive
feminine that comes in bursts.
The adventure, the exciting,
like a sexual partner.
And then I had the feeling of
being an infant on her body.
The transition from the
third matrix into the fourth
was like emergence
out of in fire.
There was like a goddess with
dark complexion and a peacock
paradise or heaven.
So it's a very, very
blissful experience.
But she became like a
great mother for me.
>> Stan's session with
Pauline in Amsterdam revealed
the archetypal nature of the
birth experience during which
the fetus is exposed to a
collective dimension filled
with powerful
imagery and emotion.
But a newborn lacks
the capacity to make
sense of what is witnessed,
and so these impressions remain
in the unconscious,
influencing us in ways
that we don't realize.
>> One of the great
contributions of Stan's work is
that he uncovered
the deep structure,
the archetypal
pattern, you might say,
of the life process as it is
incarnated and reincarnated
in us as individuals.
>> When Stan discovered the work
of Lloyd deMause and the field
of psychohistory, he noted the
parallels between the imagery
used to goad people to war and
experiences that he and his
patients had during
their sessions.
It became clear to Stan that
these unconscious memories
of helplessness from the second
matrix and anger from the third
were driving factors
in the need for power.
This need for
control was clearly
evident in the book
"A Sexual Profile
of Men in Power," which detailed
a seven-year study of call
girls and madams whose primary
clients were politicians
and government officials.
The study found that
over 50% of those men
regularly hired prostitutes,
and more than half of them
demanded kinky or
sadomasochistic sex
as a means of coping
with the powerlessness
that they experienced
in government.
>> Nine months in a total
dependence on the maternal
organism.
Then there is this incredible
roller coaster of birth
that we are taken
through, and then
emerging in a total
dependence on the mother.
It leaves a very deep
fear of the feminine
in the male psyche, and
frequently a clumsy effort
to compensate for it, not
giving women the same rights,
not to treat them as
equal citizens, and so on.
Women go through that
also, but because
of their physiological function,
because of their anatomy,
they are able to
participate directly
in the process of creation.
The male participation
is very marginal.
It can take a few minutes,
and then it's over.
The way to resolve
traumatic unconscious memory
would be if that material fully
emerges into consciousness,
which will be therapeutic.
What can happen
in everyday life,
it comes close to the surface,
but that person does not
realize what it is exactly.
But they feel the need to
create a situation that
would involve those elements.
So for example, that
transition from the third
to the fourth matrix frequently
is experienced as fire.
I worked with some people
who were arsonists,
and they had this impulse.
They felt that
something fantastic
would happen if they could
experience a big fire.
When that happens,
they watched it
and feel excitement for a
while, but it is a real letdown.
They expected something
much more phenomenal.
But the drive can
be strong enough
to drive them to do
it again and again.
In a very similar
way, the third matrix
involves a lot of
sadomasochistic kind
of experiences where
you feel sexual arousal
and you feel confined and you
feel sort of choked, and so on.
It's a kind of unrecognized
healing impulse.
But for it to be
therapeutic, it would
have to involve
introspection, understanding
what you are dealing
with, and really
be fully consciously in
touch with the material.
>> Nothing the conscious mind
can think of will ever satisfy
the unconscious.
It has to originate from the
unconscious to be cleared.
After hearing so many
of Stan's stories,
it was time for me to
find out what shadows
were lurking in my unconscious.
Would they be as dark
as what Stan had seen?
And if so, would I have the
courage to confront them?
Rule number one,
never do this alone.
The sitter is there to
keep you safe, ground you,
and more importantly,
to hold the space
so that you can completely
open to whatever comes.
As the LSD took
effect, there was
a flood of geometric imagery.
Some people call
retinal discharge,
but now I think I was
seeing fractals or even
the dimension that
holds the blueprints
of the physical world.
Soon it transitioned
into Christina.
And then, as though I was
seeing through Christina's eyes,
it was Stan.
There was a sadness
as she realized
that she was leaving him.
But then Stan transitioned
into my father and Christina
dissolved into me.
The pain was so intense that I
knew it couldn't just be mine.
I actually felt as
though I was choking.
In that moment, I
understood that although I
might have been triggered by
the pending death of my father,
I was also tapping into
the collective sadness.
And what a depth
of it there was.
Addiction, drugs, alcohol,
sex, compulsive behavior,
anything to dissolve back into
the formless ocean of love
and avoid this unbearable
sadness of separation.
It took me two days
to feel whole again.
If it hadn't been
for my kids to think
about or the sitter
to talk to, I
don't know if I would
have come out of it.
But because I had grieved my
dad's death before he died,
I was able to listen
to his daydreams
during those last
weeks of his life.
And when he finally
slipped into a coma,
I knew how to help him
detach from his body so he
wasn't afraid or in pain.
He lay like that for 28
hours, and then an hour
before my daughter's last
ballet performance, he died.
I was filming while Charlotte
danced when suddenly I
remembered that he had
sat in that theater,
and I remembered exactly
where he had sat.
The memory was so clear
that I realized that I
was seeing through his eyes.
His spirit was
there in the theater
to watch his
granddaughter dance.
After the performance,
I went to help my mom.
When I had finally
cleaned the space
so that she could remember him
in better health, I went home.
A few hours later, I
let the tears well up
and felt myself once again
pulled out by my heart.
But because I knew that
I could survive it,
I allowed the sadness to
flow, and it felt amazing.
If I hadn't witnessed
Stan's courage
and trusted his example,
I doubt any of that
would have happened.
He wasn't afraid to
confront the darkness.
In 1967, Stan was invited to
continue his research at Johns
Hopkins University in Maryland.
But pushback
against psychedelics
was growing, inflamed by
flawed studies engineered
to generate fear.
>> We have children that are
born without legs or arms,
the kind of thing we've seen
after thalidomide exposure.
>> Even though the studies
were eventually dismissed,
the culture was reeling from
the impact of psychedelics.
As a result, the research
program at Johns Hopkins
University was terminated.
Fortunately for
Stan, the program
at Spring Grove Psychiatric
Hospital was still operational.
While there, he
continued his research,
encountering even more
intriguing patients.
>> This was a patient who had
some of the most difficult
pathology, if you want
to call it that way,
that I have ever seen.
She was four years in prison.
And while on parole, she
became a multiple drug addict.
She had very difficult
episodes of depression.
So it was kind of
a life decision,
and so we decided
to take our chances.
So she had two very
powerful sessions.
She was from a family
where there was alcoholism,
there was abuse,
there was incest.
And then in the third session,
suddenly she started crying,
she started screaming.
And then a vicious
expression in her eyes.
Incredible.
Incredibly sort of
evil expression.
And this very deep voice
came and introduced itself,
himself as the devil.
And then came this barrage
of insults and threats.
There was information
that the patient as such
could not have known.
I had a wonderful nurse
that was a southern Baptist,
and she was shaking.
I thought she was
getting a heart attack.
So I was watching the patient,
and the nurse at one point--
I said, well, this is obviously
the Jungian archetype that's
manifesting here.
But maybe for that
kind of archetype,
the crucifix would
be the best remedy.
As I was reacting emotionally,
it was just becoming more real.
So I started
meditating on light.
I knew that from my
spiritual reading
that these creatures
don't like light.
Suddenly, it stopped
the way it started.
Everything relaxed.
Then as she was coming
down, we sort of
started talking about it.
And I realized she
remembered only what
happened before this episode.
And what happened after, there's
just total amnesia for this.
And I wondered if I
should sort of bring that
up and talk about it, and I
decided not to do it at all.
But she herself felt wonderful.
And then very
shortly afterwards,
she left the hospital
and probably was a little
lying on the questionnaire.
She got a job as a taxi driver.
>> But despite the tremendous
success of his work,
the program lost funding.
>> We were finding it more
and more difficult to continue
the research.
And I had a lot of material,
so I really wanted a sabbatical
and do some writing.
And I got an invitation
from several publishers
so I could take a year off.
And I went to a party
in New York City,
and there was
Michael Murphy there,
the co-founder of Esalen.
>> When I met Stan first in
'65, he was probably the best
looking man in the human
potential movement.
I mean, he was as good
looking as Richard Burton.
>> He said, so Stan, what
are you doing these days?
I said, well, I'm
actually taking a year off
to write a book.
And he said, why don't
you come to Esalen?
>> It was my instinct as a
director and producer of this
ongoing theater at Esalen.
He was perfect.
And of course, we had
been right in the middle
of a lot of experimentation
with psychedelics.
And although psychedelics
were not my ally,
Stan represented not only
another doorway into this,
but also sobriety.
I mean, he actually
thought about it.
Tim pretended to think
about it, but he just
proclaimed a vision of
taking LSD every Sunday.
If it's good, just
have more of it.
And we saw disaster after
disaster during the '60s.
So Bob Schwartz
gave us some money,
and Esalen provided a beautiful
house, and off we went.
And he became the leading force
in our overall programming
for most of the
years he was there.
>> Besides our
breathwork workshops,
we offered then
months-long workshops.
People were coming to Esalen
from all over the world,
and they didn't want to
take just one workshop.
So this gave me a
chance to choose
a topic I was interested
in and see who in the world
was doing some
cutting-edge research
and invite those
people, and then
always finding 36 people who
would want to do it with us.
>> One popular program combined
vipassana with breath work.
>> I think of a time when
we were holding our large
holotropic breathwork and
Buddhist practice retreats.
And there's a room full of
some hundreds of people,
doing the breathwork
after we had meditated,
going through these profound
openings with this music
playing.
Some people are in
heavenly states,
and some people feel like
they're dying and getting
reborn, and some people
have past life experiences
or turning into
birds or animals,
and some people are having the
reliving of their childhood.
Every possible thing.
It's like being in
Dante's "Inferno"
and "Purgatorio" and "Paradiso"
all at the same time.
And it's really quite marvelous,
because it's so well held
and tended by the facilitators.
And then when things get really
dicey, they call Stan over.
So I remember one who was
a multiple personality who
had different alters that
would show themselves
at different points.
And one of them
was really demonic.
And this whole demonic
side started to come out.
Like, (SCRATCHY VOICE)
if you come near me,
I will slash and kill you.
So the facilitators were
a little bit nervous,
because the voice and the
aggression of this demon--
you try to fix or help
me and I will get you
and I will kill
you and slash you.
It was not an easy
person to be tending.
So they called Stan
over, because it
seemed like this demon
wanted to eat everybody.
And Stan came over
very calm and cool
and sat down and said,
tell me more, you know?
You're a demon.
You have some powers.
What are those powers you have?
And who do you think you
really are as a demon?
I mean, do you really know
what your identity is?
He didn't probably
ask it in that way.
But he began to look
directly at the demon,
say, you don't know really
where you come from,
do you, who you are?
I'm very pleased to meet
you, but you don't--
and the demon started to
get confused and start
to look around.
And it was like instead of
being afraid of the demon,
Stan met this demonic energy
with a kind of curiosity
and interest and fearlessness
that the demon had never
met before.
And it started to
kind of lose its way,
and then the whole
thing morphed.
Magic happened when other
people were frightened.
That kind of innocence
that Stan has,
it's like this giant kid
wandering around, saying, wow.
Look at that.
He has this tremendous
appreciation for everything.
>> In 1974, Stan was about 43
years old, and I was about 24,
working at Esalen as a
night guard and then writing
my dissertation during the day.
And we got a call at about
4:30, 4:30 in the morning.
The night guard who was on that
night said, we've got a crisis,
and we need you guys
here right away.
1:00 AM to 5:30 every
morning we would
let in people from outside
of Esalen to use the baths.
A young man had taken
LSD with his girlfriend
and started to flip out at
some point during the session.
Became violently paranoid.
The girlfriend had
escaped from the guy.
He had gone up the
hill to their van.
All we knew was that
he's got a knife.
He's naked.
He's psychotically
paranoid and violent.
As we're approaching the
van, I'm thinking to myself,
oh, this is great.
Just because I'm writing
a dissertation on LSD
psychotherapy, I'm now in
a life and death situation.
So Stan opens the
sliding van door.
The bottle is thrown
right by his head.
And then he goes in,
picks up a blanket,
wraps it around the man,
and puts him in a bear hug
and says, OK.
You've taken a very
powerful psychoactive drug.
I want you to close your
eyes and pay attention
to what's going on inside you.
Within about 15
minutes, the young man
was laughing at himself, but
at the same time embarrassed
for what he had caused.
It was a real testament to
Stan's personal courage,
but it also was an illustration
of his whole philosophy
of trusting the psyche.
The very first
lecture that I ever
heard Stan give in
March of 1974 at Esalen,
I asked him at the
end, what do you
do in the case of someone who's
in a really bad trip where
they're descending
into an incessant loop
that they can't
get out of and they
feel like they're
losing their sanity?
And these things can have
enduring effects too.
And he said with a kind
of poetic conciseness
that I've never
forgotten, he just said,
the full experience
of an emotion
is the funeral pyre
of the emotion.
And he just pointed out that we
have a tendency to, of course,
wall ourselves off from
the pain, the scary things
in our psyche that
are trying to emerge.
But he says, that's actually
the way out of the pathology
of the suffering.
So he was able to convey
with that one sentence
the idea that bad trips and
negative material, which
Tim Leary did not
prepare the masses for,
were actually a royal road
to transformative healing.
>> I think it's essential when
we discuss psychedelics now
to talk about the
challenging experiences,
and that it's not all easy.
MAPS does psychedelic harm
reduction at Burning Man
and at festivals
all over the world.
And one of our main
principles is "difficult
is not the same as bad."
And I think that's where
with psychedelic therapy
right now we prepare people
in a much different way
and really talk about a lot
of the kernels of wisdom
will come wrapped in these
very difficult experiences.
>> Stan recognized early on that
existing schools of psychology
couldn't explain the profound
experiences and resulting
transformations that he
and his patients underwent.
Even before moving
to Esalen, Stan
worked with Abe
Maslow and Tony Sutich
to develop transpersonal
psychology, which
recognized the spiritual
nature of humanity
and the importance of memories
from our time in the womb
and beyond.
>> We got to the point where
we were very satisfied with
the kind of new psychology,
but we had no idea how we could
possibly link that gap between
this kind of system that we
created and what we knew as
the scientific psychology.
And that's where meeting Fritjof
Capra and reading his book,
"The Tao of Physics," was
extremely important for me.
Frances Vaughan
invited him to Tiburon
to meet transpersonal
psychologists,
and we really hit it off.
>> We planned these
seminars together,
which we called journeys
beyond space and time.
And those were an inner journey
of transpersonal experiences
and the outer journey
of physicists delving
into matter at the atomic
and subatomic level.
>> Fritjof would take the
morning and tell people how
scientists, physicists now
see the world of matter.
>> I presented perception of
reality where the solid objects
of our everyday experience
dissolve into energy patterns
and where particles can travel
backward and forward in time,
where these energy patterns
furthermore are intrinsically
dynamic, the whole universe
being some sort of a cosmic
dance of energy.
Stan was describing very
similar experiences.
And as I did, he
was comparing them
to the experience of mystics.
Now we had three perspectives.
The mystical experience, the
transpersonal experience,
and the experience of physicists
in those subatomic experiments.
>> After lunch when people
came, it was time for me to talk
about my research.
It was pretty sober as compared
to what Fritjof was describing.
And I was talking
about something
that happens in some unusual
states of consciousness,
whereas Fritjof was
redefining the material
world that we live in.
>> One of the key insights from
the new physics is that reality
has something of a holographic
structure or a fractal
structure.
And the simplest example of
this is a mathematical structure
that we call the Mandelbrot set.
Now in science, this
is called nested sets
of self-similar
structures, but I
like to think that
this is actually
a modern scientific discovery
of an ancient hermetic principle
of alchemy.
As above, so below.
As within, so without.
That basically, the microcosm
replicates the macrocosm.
If we apply these
ideas to spirituality,
what I would propose
is that consciousness
itself has the same
fractal structure, which
means that there is
a self-similarity
at all levels of existence.
>> Stan was one of the
very first to give this new
conception of life and this
new perception of reality
an emotional content,
an experiential content.
I think this is one of his
many great contributions.
>> So many new perspectives
were introduced during those
workshops and
month-long intensives.
Michael Harner, who Stan
had met on his first trip
to the United States,
presented his work
in core shamanic practices.
>> It was 1965.
We met at the Esalen bathtubs.
Is that--
>> Yes, this was an
interesting meeting.
We were both stark
naked when we first met.
>> Yeah.
A good way to start.
Had nothing to hide.
>> Richard Tarnas,
together with Stan,
developed archetypal astrology
as a means for gaining a deeper
understanding of the forces
influencing individual
and collective psyches.
>> We noticed the phenomenology
of the perinatal matrices could
have been passages from
handbooks of astrology.
So that was mind
blowing, because I
had no understanding of
astrology when I was doing it.
But then we found out
something even more amazing,
that actually people were
having in their sessions
the encounter with elements of
these matrices at the time when
they had these planets as
some significant transit.
So it became
something that allowed
prediction, what kind of
experiences people would have.
I had the chance to spend
very informal time with people
who were the pioneers.
You know, Fritjof Capra,
Rupert Sheldrake, Karl Pribram.
We had Huston Smith,
Joseph Campbell.
No university had
that kind of a staff.
So when I started the
International Transpersonal
Association, I could
pick up the telephone
and say, I want to do a
conference in Bombay, in India.
I can pay the round-trip
ticket and feed you.
They put you up.
But I can't give any honorarium.
Do you want to come?
And they all said yes.
>> Stan Grof wrote me a long
handwritten letter saying how
much he liked my book.
He'd had a copy shipped.
And he invited me to
speak at a conference
he was organizing in Bombay.
But I'd never been
to California,
and I'd never heard of things
like the New Age movement.
I'd never heard of Stan Grof.
I'd never heard of Esalen.
And suddenly in this
hotel it was a kind
of astonishing
world of people who
were into
consciousness research,
talking about the
Esalen Institute.
Stan was talking about his
psychotropic breathing and LSD
research, and so on.
I was amazed to find
myself in an environment
where I could talk
about the things
I was really most
interested in, where
people were interested
in finding out
more, a kind of fizz of
excitement and discovery
and new horizons.
>> People were just very hungry
to find an atmosphere where
they could connect with
like-minded people.
They were not
afraid of criticism
that would have any implications
for their reputation
or their position.
So we really got the
truth from people.
>> There is a domain of
potentiality which is
non-local, and
therefore, it is oneness.
>> The universe
doesn't work on the--
>> Stan represents what
has been sorely lacking,
which is the long throughline,
a work over decades.
Because in this wild,
meandering exploration
of the further reaches
of human nature,
particularly in the '60s, but
even in the long sobering up
of the '70s, he's
been able to provide
a huge body of empirical lore.
>> It's fair to say, I think,
that I wouldn't be doing
the research that I'm doing had
it not have been for reading
Stan's "Realms of the
Human Unconscious."
>> Yet despite the tremendous
insights shared during
Stan's tenure at Esalen and
his continued exploration
of the healing power
of non-ordinary states
of consciousness, so
little has changed.
>> The work with holotropic
states also provides very,
very interesting insight
into how we should approach
the situation that we have
in the world where we are
in global crisis, in some
sense on the verge of possible
extinction.
And not just our species, but
taking a few species with us.
Changing the situation
is not simple.
We cannot just do
kind of transpersonal,
spiritual sanitization
of creation,
if we simply eliminate
everything that we don't like
that we think is bad or evil.
>> It was hard for me to
hear what Stan was saying.
I'd always hoped that one
could avoid darkness and pain.
I didn't want to believe
that light and shadow were
equal parts of the whole.
Perhaps ayahuasca could help
me make peace with that.
The problem with
ayahuasca is that it can
take a long time to come on.
The mistake that I made was
thinking I hadn't had enough.
I really thought I was dying.
But in my heart, I knew
that it was too late.
There was nothing to be done,
so I purged and surrendered.
It took me a while
to realize that I
was in another dimension, and
that as long as I remained
formless in it, I was fine.
If I tried to feel my body,
I was instantly nauseous.
For six hours, I stayed
in the quantum field.
At times, it seemed I was
watching reincarnation
where a soul would merge
with the possibility wave
and then tumble down into
increasing density, flipping
like a coin between
victim and perpetrator.
Pretty much every
deep experience
I've had since has been
uncomfortable in ways
I never could have imagined.
But most often, I end up in a
place of great beauty and love,
as though the ugliness had to be
fully experienced before I had
access to the underlying joy.
When I look back at my
archetypal astrology,
I see now that I've been through
a series of death and rebirth.
What died was my
limited sense of self.
Once that illusion
slipped away, I
could feel my true
nature as energy
beyond the creative
and destructive cycles
of the universe,
timeless and vast,
within a unity that might
be forgotten but never lost.
>> I think it's healthier
to know that the devil is
something within our psyches
and within our souls as humans
rather than some
object out there.
>> I think people who are
in touch with the state
of the world right now recognize
that we're basically all
skating on thin ice.
There is a profound
sense of uncertainty
and potentially looming danger
of catastrophic proportions.
And it takes a lot of
courage to face that.
We can't simply be
sure we can be bringing
in some technological fix
or a rational solution
to this situation.
Uncertainty itself
is a key part of
any initiatory transformation.
You can't have a pretend
near-death experience
in order to have an effective
transfiguration of how
you live.
You need to really feel
everything is at stake
and you don't know the outcome.
And if we can have the
courage to face that
and to go through this
dark night of the soul,
in some sense, and to bring
all our' wits and heart
and imagination and
bravery together
to engage this
great threshold, I
think that's the
key to our future.
>> If anybody's
paying attention,
they're traumatized in some way.
And psychedelics can help
us deal with those fears
and still look
positively at what
we can do to contribute
to make them better.
So there's a lot of
the astronauts who've
looked back at the
Earth from space
and realized that it's a
single organism, that there
are no clear country boundaries,
that we're all in this
together.
We're all part of this 14
billion years of evolution
and have been spiritualized.
When people grasp the
sense of the whole,
that has profound
political implications.
And it's a lot cheaper to
give somebody a psychedelic
than shoot them up to the moon.
[LAUGHS]
>> The power of psychedelics
to profoundly change people is
remarkable.
>> The information that was
delivered to me in those
experiences has pretty much
formed the rest of my life
since then.
>> The depression was gone.
Never came back.
I became a different
person who was
able to enjoy life,
learn how to love,
who was nicer to my children
and my grandchildren.
The substance, which
was a psychedelic,
helped me so much
that I dedicated
the rest of my life to make
it available to everyone
who suffers.
>> I now have
completely, 180 degrees,
modified my viewpoint to
understand that we are
spiritual beings, performing and
acting and learning in physical
bodies.
And it is through the power
of some of the psychedelics,
it's through some of the
ideas of Stan and the people
that he has brought together
with him that this new opening
has happened in my life as well
as in the lives of thousands
and millions of people.
>> And now ever since that,
any time when things like this
happen-- of course, they
happen again and again--
I remember what Stan told me.
You're ready.
Face it.
Your psyche will not give
you any task that you cannot
tackle.
>> Regardless of the method,
it's the state one finds
themselves in that
matters, awake and joyful
in the heartfelt knowledge
of being part of something
greater.
It's only fitting that Stan
experienced his own rebirth
after Christina's passing.
For years, he had suffered
from debilitating back
pain and nerve
sensitivity in his legs,
but a higher than normal
dose of medical marijuana
launched a process that
freed him from that pain.
>> And I had the feeling
that I was dying.
And I saw all the people
who died before me--
Angie Arrien and
Christina, Sasha Shulgin
and Hans Ruedi Giger.
So I had the feeling this
is the end of an era,
and I was joining.
And then there was that sense
like, no, you're not ready yet.
And sort of, you
go back, you know?
You have more work to do.
And I went for about
a month into a lot
of non-ordinary states
of consciousness.
Spontaneous chanting was coming.
A significant part of
it was about whales.
>> During this period, Brigitte,
one of Stan's first students
and dearly loved by
him, reached out.
>> During the first phone
call where we reconnected,
she told me that she was about
to go for a trip where it is
possible to actually meet
the whales and swim with
the dolphins.
That was an amazing experience.
We first met when Brigitte
came to a lecture of mine
in Freiburg after she had had a
very difficult LSD experience.
And very shortly
afterwards, she participated
in our first
breathwork and decided
to come to Esalen where
she stayed for a year,
and she did several
of the trainings
of holotropic breathwork.
I've always loved her.
She's brought incredible
spirits into all the groups
that she participated in.
And she was always a light
of my life at the time
when I was committed
to really not have
any way of sort of bringing
the relationship farther.
And then the situation
changed, so we decided
to join our lives together.
>> A toast to it's
never too late.
In everyone's life, it
is just never too late.
>> I never expected that late
years in my life would be
the happiest time of my life.
>> I've just always loved him,
and I feel very blessed that we
can be together.
It's a dream come true.
It's just this oneness we
share, and the humor and the way
we see things, the inner
journeys that we share.
It's just wonderful
to be married to Stan.
>> And just as Stan and
Brigitte's paths circled back
to Esalen where they
now teach together,
so has my journey returned me
to a familiar sense of peace.
What began as a quest to
reconnect with my teachers
has evolved into a
deeper understanding
of what it is to be human.
I followed the path
that Stan forged
and explored the
darkness and the light,
finding beauty in both.
The Tantric imagery
that drew me to Stan
now makes up a daily practice
that not just maintains,
but grows the
sense of connection
I've found through
my psychedelic work.
What I find amazing
is the parallel
between what happens to
one's brain on psychedelics
and what is experienced
in Tantric meditation.
I learned so much from Stan.
The techniques he developed
and the spiritual grounding he
provided for them holds such
promise for these challenging
times.
May we follow his
example and begin
our own journeys of discovery.
>> One really fundamental
principle of shamanism is that
everything is one and
is alive and has spirit.
>> It was indeed this other
reality that could be accessed
in different ways.
And like Stan, I've
come to that conclusion
that it is ontologically real.
>> The energies that people
liberate in themselves,
it's just so beautiful to see.
I mean, we just
live up to, I don't
know, how little
of our potential
in normal, everyday life.
And so seeing people
becoming alive,
including myself, and
awakening is just beautiful.
>> Bringing about any change in
a way of being in the world is
having some access
to these deep layers.
And one of the ways used
by all traditions is sound.
>> Those moments that may
be so tragic or so joyful,
so ecstatic that reside
in the collective,
maybe reside in the
collective unconscious,
they live again through us
in these non-ordinary states.
And again, the
practice of working
with the transits of
understanding them
through an astrological
lens can provide a map
to see each one of those
experiences through history,
and then how it comes to bear
on our own personal experience.
>> A new concept, a new
paradigm from the ground up.
What the universe is, who we
are, and where we are going?
These are, to me,
the key questions.
And basically, it has to be an
integral, integrated answer.
Or if you don't
find it, then it's
our fault, because
the universe doesn't
work on little bits and pieces.
It works as a whole.
>> It's not like a side
effect of the drugs.
Like you could say,
well, they have
these religious experiences.
Because the spiritual dimensions
is the core dimension.
It's the core dimension.
It's not an add-on that
you can take or leave.
And that changes everything.
>> People who do some
responsible systematic work
with these powerful
experiential methods,
from some intense spiritual
practice to psychedelics,
they tend to develop
independently a certain kind
of worldview that they share.
It's the Buckminster
Fuller idea, you know?
We are on a spaceship.
We are all in it together.
And what some of us do
will influence the others.
There's no way of
isolating that.
I have seen that
powerful transformation
happening in individuals.
Now, whether this is
possible on a large scale
and whether we have enough
time, that's a different story.
[MUSIC PLAYING]